# IST659 Data Administration Concepts and Database Management

Syracuse University Graduate Course Syllabus

## Course Information

## Description

### Definition, development, and management of databases for information systems. Data analysis techniques, data modeling, and schema design. Query languages and search specifications. Overview of file organization for databases. Data administration concepts and skills.

### Additional Course Description

This is an introductory course in database management systems. It
examines data structures, file organizations, concepts, and principles
of database management systems (DBMS), as well as data analysis,
database design, data modeling, database management, and database
implementation. More specifically, it introduces hierarchical, network,
and relational data models; entity-relationship modeling; basics of
Structured Query Language (SQL); data normalization; and database
design. This course provides hands-on experience in database design and
implementation through assignments, lab exercises, and course projects.
This course also introduces advanced database concepts such as
transaction management and concurrency control, distributed databases,
multitier client-server architectures, database applications, improving
query performance through indexing, and advanced data query patterns for
extract, transform, load (ETL).

## Prerequisite/Co-requisite: None

## Audience: This is an introductory course and requires no prior knowledge in the subject area.

## Credits: 3

### Learning Objectives

Upon completing this course, the learner should be able to:

-   Describe fundamental data and database concepts, including various
    storage models.

-   Explain and use the database development life-cycle and data models.

-   Analyze business problems and design and implement appropriate
    data-oriented solutions using the relational data storage model.

-   Solve problems by constructing database objects and queries using
    SQL.

-   Identify performance and data integrity improvements of existing
    database designs and implementations.

-   Evaluate and select approaches for data migrations, temporal data,
    and data normalization.

-   Critique the effectiveness of DBMS in computer information systems.

### Course Fees and/or Costs

-   None

### Required Textbooks and Supplies

-   *Applied Database Management*, by Michael Fudge. ISBN 9781644965900.
    The book is an online text, available <https://www.grlcontent.com/>.

-   Students are expected to have a laptop computer to participate in
    the class sessions, run the lab software, and complete the Homework
    Problem Sets. Requirements are any Mac OS X, Windows 10, or
    Chromebook with 8GB RAM and 8GB free disk space.

### Understanding the Approach Used in This Course

To instill good habits and routine, the approach used in this course is
the same each week. It is designed to allow you to progress as a
learner, ask questions, and grow comfortable with the material
throughout the week. There are three phases to the approach:

-   **Coursework before class** consists of a chapter reading from the
    textbook and a video lecture. Both are active learning tools, and
    you will be asked questions as you read and watch. Your responses
    are not graded but will be reviewed by your instructor to prepare
    for the in-class session. As part of your engagement with the
    learning process, it is expected that you will review your own
    answers and prepare any questions or doubts you have about the
    coursework. You will also be issued a quiz that reinforces basic
    concepts from the textbook and asynchronous content. Your learning
    outcomes at this stage are to recall key terms and understand the
    concepts presented to you.

-   The **live session** allows you to reinforce what you have learned
    and to begin to apply it to new problems and situations. We begin
    each class with students posting their coursework questions to the
    community board. Your questions should be based on concepts that
    remain unclear to you. These questions will guide our class
    discussions and activities. We then review the previous week's
    homework problem set, discussing strategies, and sharing answers to
    them.

-   **After class** you will complete a lab and Homework Problem Set.
    The lab contains a walk-through to guide you through the application
    of the problem-solving approaches relevant to this week's material.
    The Homework Problem Set is your opportunity to self-measure your
    knowledge of the material and application of it to new situations
    and scenarios. Included with your Homework Problem Set is a
    metacognitive activity where you are asked to reflect on your
    experiences as a learner that week and asses your comfort level with
    the material.

### Tools We May Use in This Course

It is suggested that you install and configure these tools on your
laptop before the course begins.

-   **Zoom.** Zoom is a video conferencing tool we will use for our
    scheduled online and hybrid face-to-face sessions. Download the Zoom
    client at <https://zoom.us>

-   **Microsoft Teams.** Teams is collaboration tool. Integrating with
    email and calendar, Teams offers presence awareness and
    chat/messaging. These chats can be elevated into a video conference.
    We will use teams for class discussions, homework questions, and
    office hours. You are welcome to contact me whenever my status says
    I am available. Your Office 365 account is linked to your NetID. Log
    on to teams by visiting <https://portal.office.com>, entering your
    SU email <netid@syr.edu> and then your NetID password. One you are
    signed into Office 365, click the Teams icon.

-   **Google Docs**. We will use Google Docs as a collaborative
    note-taking tool to work in class on problems and breakout
    activities. Log in with your SU Google account: <https://g.syr.edu>.

-   **Docker**. Docker is a containerization platform, allowing you to
    run applications in isolation from your host computer. In this
    course, we use it to run the DBMS itself and supporting tools. You
    can download and install Docker by following the instructions here:
    <https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/>

-   **Azure Data Studio**. Azure Data Studio (ADS) is a SQL database
    client. While you can get away with using the web tools provided
    with the Learn Databases setup, the ADS experience is better. To
    install, follow the instructions here:
    <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/azure-data-studio/download-azure-data-studio>

-   **Learn Databases.** Learn Databases is a suite of Docker containers
    that create a database lab environment on your computer. There are
    containers for the SQL Server database management system itself and
    three web tools for provisioning sample databases, database
    administration, and writing SQL scripts. After you have installed
    Docker, follow the instructions at
    <https://github.com/mafudge/learn-databases#walkthrough> to set it
    up. Do not create any sample databases at this time---you will do
    this as part of the first Homework Problem Set.

## Special Considerations

### Class Materials and Recordings

Please be aware that all class sessions will be recorded. Original class
materials (handouts, code samples, assignments, quizzes, textbook
chapters, etc.) and recordings of class sessions are the intellectual
property of the course instructor. You may download these materials for
your use in this class. However, you may not provide these materials to
other parties (e.g., websites, social media, other students) without
permission. Doing so is a violation of intellectual property law and of
the student code of conduct.

## Academic Expectations

### Requirements

As an enrolled student in this course, it is expected that you will:

1.  **Complete asynchronous coursework.** It is expected you will
    complete the assigned textbook readings, quizzes, and video
    coursework as prescribed.

    -   Participation in the assigned reading and video coursework is
        required and will be measured.

    -   Attendance in online or face-to-face sessions is required, and
        there are no excused absences other than medical illness
        documented by the university.

    -   While in attendance, you are expected to be engaged, an active
        participant in class. You should be prepared to ask and answer
        questions to the best of your ability when called upon.

    -   It is expected that you will have your microphone muted until
        you need to speak, and your video camera on at all times.

    -   In some classes, an ungraded pop quiz or other type of
        diagnostic instrument will measure your comprehension of
        coursework and passing will count as your participation grade
        for that week.

    -   **Reading, participation, and coursework are not graded but do
        impact your grade.**

        -   **unprepared for 2 units of the course: decrease your final
            grade by one Registrar Grade. (For example, A to A-) ** 

        -   **For 4 or more units of the course: decrease your final
            grade one complete letter: B+ to C+ for example.**  

        -   **You will be notified when you reach these thresholds.** 

2.  **Complete quizzes**. The intention of the quiz is to ensure that
    you are keeping pace with the coursework and to measure your
    understanding of the class material. Quizzes should be completed by
    11:59 PM Eastern the day before our live session.

    -   You will get one attempt at the quiz, and your attempt must be
        complete before your class meeting.

    -   Quizzes are open book.

    -   Quizzes consist of multiple-choice and/or short answer
        questions.

    -   Quizzes measure only individual effort.

    -   You must complete the quiz on your own time, outside class.

    -   Quizzes are due 11:59 PM Eastern the day before our live
        session. This provides your instructor ample time to review
        student answers and prepare for the live session.

3.  **Complete** **homework problem sets**. Homework Problem Sets are
    technical activities that enforce key concepts learned in the lesson
    through problem solving and practice. You start them after the live
    session and complete them by the 11:59 PM Eastern the day before our
    next live session. It is important to remember that the homework is
    practice; if you do not have the right answers, it is expected you
    will have questions. Save those questions for our discussions. You
    are expected to reflect on your learning. Each homework problem set
    is assigned a grade of:

    -   High Pass (10 points)---the assignment is complete and correct,
        with very minor errors, and the student contributes to homework
        discussion in class and reflects on your learning for that week.

    -   Pass (7 points)---the assignment is complete and mostly correct,
        or the student has few to no contributions to homework
        discussions in class or little to no reflection on your learning
        for the week.

    -   Needs Improvement (3 points)---the assignment is incomplete or
        has several errors or is late, with no reflection.

    ```{=html}
    <!-- -->
    ```
    -   Fail (0 points)---the assignment was not turned in after 1 week.

4.  **Complete a** **team project**, which demonstrates your ability to
    work in a team to design and implement a functional system with a
    database, based on what you have learned in the course. Guidelines
    for this are:

    -   Work in self-assembled teams of two to three students.

    -   Devise your own database to design and implement. The project
        idea must be preapproved, prior to beginning work.

Required artifacts for team project submission are as follows:

1.  Document with team name, group members, and which project you will
    work on. If the project is your own idea, a requirements document
    must be submitted and approved.

2.  Data analysis of the facts listing entities, attributes, and
    relationships in the data model.

3.  Conceptual data model diagram.

4.  Logical data model diagram.

5.  Identification of your external data model and data logic.

6.  Basic layout of all application screens.

7.  Diagram of each screen used in the application.

8.  SQL up/down script to implement the internal model with initial
    data.

9.  SQL up/down Script to load/migrate in existing data.

10. SQL up/down script of data logic for the external data model.

11. Implementation of the application itself.

12. A team log recording individual and group contributions to the
    project, including when and by whom.

13. A slide deck of your presentation.

14. A video recording of your team presentation.

15. A video reflection of what you learned from the experience, what you
    would do better if you had the time, etc.

The rubric is as follows:

1.  Quality of artifacts (slides, code, video, documents, etc.)

2.  Completeness of project---does it work?

3.  Purpose of project---does it do something of value?

4.  What was learned from the experience?

5.  Does the project demonstrate what the team has learned pertinent to
    the course?

### Grading:

+----------------------+------+-----+--------------------------+-----+
| **Type of Activity** | **Qu | *   | **Notes**                | **T |
|                      | anti | *Po |                          | ota |
|                      | ty** | int |                          | l** |
|                      |      | s** |                          |     |
+======================+======+=====+==========================+=====+
| 1.  Homework Problem | 10   | 10  | Start after class,       | 100 |
|     Sets             |      |     | complete before next     |     |
|                      |      |     | class.                   |     |
+----------------------+------+-----+--------------------------+-----+
| 2.  Quizzes          | 10   | 10  | Complete before class.   | 100 |
+----------------------+------+-----+--------------------------+-----+
| 3.  Final Team       | 1    | 50  | Refer to team project    | 50  |
|     Project          |      |     | section in "Academic     |     |
|                      |      |     | Expectations."           |     |
+----------------------+------+-----+--------------------------+-----+
| **Total Points**     |      |     |                          | *   |
|                      |      |     |                          | *25 |
|                      |      |     |                          | 0** |
+----------------------+------+-----+--------------------------+-----+

### Grading Scale:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Student            **Points**        **Grade Points** **Registrar
  Achievement**                                           Grade**
  -------------------- ----------------- ---------------- ----------------
  Mastery              238--250          4.0              A

                       225--237          3.667            A-

  Satisfactory         213--224          3.333            B+

                       200--212          3.0              B

  Low Passing          188--199          2.667            B-

                       175--187          2.333            C+

  Unsatisfactory       163-- 174         2.0              C

                       150 --162         1.667            C-

                       0--149            0                F
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Course Calendar

### Course Schedule 

+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| We | Topic for That Week         | Due 11:59PM Eastern 1 day before |
| ek |                             | live session                     |
+====+=============================+==================================+
| 0  | Make sure you have the text |                                  |
|    | and that your lab           |                                  |
|    | environment works.          |                                  |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 1  | 1\. Introduction to         | -   Video coursework for Week 1  |
|    | Databases                   |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Read Unit 1; Unit 1 quiz     |
|    | *Data, information,         |                                  |
|    | metadata and data           |                                  |
|    | management*                 |                                  |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2  | 2\. The Relational Data     | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | Model\                      |     Set 1**                      |
|    | *relational concepts in     |                                  |
|    | depth, keys, constraints,   | -   Video coursework for Week 2  |
|    | tables and relations.*      |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Read Unit 2; Unit 2 quiz     |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 3  | 3\. Introduction to SQL\    | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | *DDL, DML, migration        |     Set 2**                      |
|    | scripts*                    |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Video coursework for Week 3  |
|    |                             |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Read Unit 3; Unit 3 quiz     |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 4  | 4\. SQL Select, Part I\     | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | *Projections, filters,      |     Set 3**                      |
|    | joins, table / column       |                                  |
|    | aliases, case*              | -   Video coursework for Week 4  |
|    |                             |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Read Unit 4; Unit 4 quiz     |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 5  | 5\. SQL Select, Part II\    | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | *Aggregates, group          |     Set 4**                      |
|    | by/having, common table     |                                  |
|    | expressions, window         | -   Video coursework for Week 5  |
|    | functions, set operations*  |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Read Unit 5; Unit 5 quiz     |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 6  | 6\. Data Modeling\          | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | *ER-Models, Conceptual ER   |     Set 5**                      |
|    | Diagramming\                |                                  |
|    | Logical Models, Mapping,    | -   Video coursework for Week 6  |
|    | Relational Notation*        |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Read Units 7 and 8; Unit 7   |
|    |                             |     and 8 quizzes                |
|    |                             |                                  |
|    |                             |     -   The average of the two   |
|    |                             |         quiz scores will be your |
|    |                             |         quiz grade for this      |
|    |                             |         week.                    |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 7  | 7\. Database Applications   | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | and Programming\            |     Set 6**                      |
|    | *CRUD applications, stored  |                                  |
|    | procedures, functions,      | -   Video coursework for Week 7  |
|    | views, triggers, data logic |                                  |
|    | vs business logic*          | -   Read Units 9 and 10; Unit 9  |
|    |                             |     and 10 quizzes               |
|    |                             |                                  |
|    |                             |     -   The average of the two   |
|    |                             |         quiz scores will be your |
|    |                             |         quiz grade for this      |
|    |                             |         week.                    |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 8  | 8\. Transactions and        | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | Concurrency Control\        |     Set 7**                      |
|    | *transaction management,    |                                  |
|    | commit / rollback,          | -   Video coursework for Week 8  |
|    | transaction safety, locks,  |                                  |
|    | versioning, deadlocks*      | -   Read Unit 11; Unit 11 quiz   |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 9  | 9\. Performance and         | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | Indexing\                   |     Set 8**                      |
|    | *Reading query plans, scans |                                  |
|    | vs seeks, clustered non     | -   Video coursework for Week 9  |
|    | cluster index, tuning for   |                                  |
|    | performance.*               | -   Read Unit 12; Unit 12 quiz   |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 10 | 10\. Data Normalization\    | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    | *1^st^, 2^nd^ and 3^rd^     |     Set 9**                      |
|    | normal forms. Table         |                                  |
|    | redesigns for normal forms, | -   Video coursework for Week 10 |
|    | migration of data to new    |                                  |
|    | tables*                     | -   Read Unit 13; Unit 13 quiz   |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 11 | Final Team Project          | -   Complete **Homework Problem  |
|    |                             |     Set 10**                     |
|    |                             |                                  |
|    |                             | -   Complete Final Team Project  |
+----+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+

: Weekly lecture topics and related reading and assignments

## University Policies

### Academic Integrity Policy

Syracuse University's Academic Integrity Policy reflects the high value
that we, as a university community, place on honesty in academic work.
The policy in effect at the School of Information Studies defines our
expectations for academic honesty and holds students accountable for the
integrity of all work they submit. Students should understand that it is
their responsibility to learn about course-specific expectations, as
well as about university-wide academic integrity expectations. The pilot
policy governs appropriate citation and use of sources, the integrity of
work submitted in exams and assignments, and the veracity of signatures
on attendance sheets and other verification of participation in class
activities. The pilot policy also prohibits students from submitting the
same work in more than one class without receiving written authorization
in advance from both instructors. Under the pilot policy, students found
in violation are subject to grade sanctions determined by the course
instructor and non-grade sanctions determined by the School or College
where the course is offered. SU students are required to read an online
summary of the university's academic integrity expectations and provide
an electronic signature agreeing to abide by them twice a year during
pre-term check-in on MySlice. For more information and on the policy,
see <http://academicintegrity.syr.edu>.

### Disability-Related Accommodations

Syracuse University values diversity and inclusion; we are committed to
a climate of mutual respect and full participation. If you believe that
you need accommodations for a disability, please contact the Office of
Disability Services (ODS),
[https://disabilityresources.syr.edu](https://disabilityresources.syr.edu/),
located at 804 University Avenue, room 309, or call 315.443.4498 for an
appointment to discuss your needs and the process for requesting
accommodations. ODS is responsible for coordinating disability-related
accommodations and will issue "Accommodation Authorization Letters" to
students as appropriate. Since accommodations may require early planning
and generally are not provided retroactively, please contact ODS as soon
as possible. Our goal at the iSchool is to create learning environments
that are usable, equitable, inclusive, and welcoming. If there are
aspects of the instruction or design of this course that result in
barriers to your inclusion or accurate assessment of achievement, please
meet with me to discuss additional strategies beyond official
accommodations that may be helpful to your success.

### Religious Observances Notification and Policy

SU's religious observances policy, found at
<https://policies.syr.edu/policies/university-governance-ethics-integrity-and-legal-compliance/religious-observances-policy/>,
recognizes the diversity of faiths represented in the campus community
and protects the rights of students, faculty, and staff to observe
religious holy days according to their tradition. Under the policy,
students should have an opportunity to make up any examination, study,
or work requirements that may be missed due to a religious observance,
provided they notify their instructors no later than the end of the
second week of classes through an online notification form in MySlice
listed under **Student Services/Enrollment/My Religious Observances/Add
a Notification**. 

### Student Academic Work Policy

Student work prepared for university courses in any media may be used
for educational purposes, if the course syllabus makes clear that such
use may occur. You grant permission to have your work used in this
manner by registering for and by continuing to be enrolled in courses
where such use of student work is announced in the course syllabus.

I may use academic work that you complete this semester in subsequent
semesters for educational purposes. Before using your work for that
purpose, I will either get your written permission or render the work
anonymous by removing all your personal identification.

### Course Evaluations

There will be an end-of-course evaluation for you to complete this term,
described below. This evaluation will be conducted online and is
entirely anonymous. You will receive a notification from the Syracuse
University Office of Institutional Research and Assessment (OIRA)
department in your email account with the evaluation website link and
your passcode.

We faculty work hard to do the best possible job when preparing and
delivering courses for our students. Please understand that not only
does the school use the course evaluations to make decisions about the
curriculum in order to improve where necessary, but they also use them
to make decisions about faculty members. Please take the time and fill
out this evaluation, as your feedback and support of this assessment
effort is very much appreciated.

## Other Course Policies

-   All work is due on the dates provided. No late work is accepted,
    unless explicitly noted. The reasoning is that the grading is
    participation/effort based and most of the content is time
    sensitive.

-   Final grades will not be rounded up. A 94/100 is an A-; please don't
    ask.

### Academic Integrity

-   We take academic integrity seriously, and so should you.

-   It is our expectation that your work will be 100% representative of
    your academic abilities.

-   Cheating, including assistance from others or use of non-sanctioned
    academic materials on quizzes or homework, is prohibited.

-   Do not work together unless the instructions state explicitly that
    you are permitted to do so.

-   When in doubt as to whether you can use a resource outside those
    provided in the course, ask.

-   All violations of academic integrity will be reported to the AI
    Office. The proposed grade sanction is an F in the course.

### Office Hours

You are welcome to stop by during office hours without an appointment.
Should you need to make an appointment to see me outside of office
hours, you must request via email with the following:

-   State your reason for the appointment.

-   Include three times in which you can meet.

-   Make sure two times are on different days.

I will respond to you within 24 hours.

### Group Work

The only group work permitted in this course is the team project. All
other gradable work in this course should be considered as individual
effort. It is assumed that each of you knows the difference between
simply discussing work with your classmates and working collaboratively.
When in doubt, ask.
