# Overview

This instructor's guide explains how to best teach this course using the
materials provided.

# Pedagogical Approach (please share with the student)

I would like to spend time explaining the pedagogical approach I use in
this course. I am a big believer in the science behind distributed
practice. Simply put, you will be more effective learner if you are
exposed to the subject matter several times over the week, rather than
just one per week. As such, each lesson has three phases, which I
recommend you distribute over 4 days each week:

1.  **Before Class:** **Coursework phase**. Before our class meeting,
    you are expected to:

    a.  read the assigned textbook chapter and complete the active
        learning activities,

    b.  watch the video lecture and complete the active learning
        activities therein, and

    c.  as you consume the lesson, prepare questions or demonstrations
        you would like to see pertinent to the course material,

    d.  complete a textbook chapter quiz

> For best results, try to spread these activities over at least two
> different days. For instance, you might read on

2.  **In-Class. Learning Reinforcement.** During our three-hour class
    session, we will engage in activities that reinforce of what you
    have learned and provide feedback for activities completed outside
    of class. We will:

    a.  Answer your posted questions based on the course material. There
        is an expectation you will come to class with questions and
        doubts about the course material. These will be addressed and
        discussed in the in-class session.

    b.  Go over the textbook and lecture questions frequently missed by
        the students offering reinforcement of the concepts as required,
        1

    c.  Review the quiz answers and discuss problematic questions,

    d.  Go over the previous unit's lab problem set. Students will be
        expected to post and discuss their solutions, and

    e.  Time-permitting, participate in class activities which
        demonstrate your ability to apply the course material

3.  **After Class. Demonstrate what you can apply.** Lab and Problem
    Set. After class, you are expected to complete:

    a.  a lab: a guided activity based on the week's coursework, and

    b.  a problem set: homework problems where you must problem solve
        and develop solutions to problems related to the week's
        coursework.

This system is very effective and once you get used to it, I am certain
you will discover it is a productive use of your time.

# Tools Used In This Course

-   **Learn-Databases.** This is a containerized database environment
    with sample data. Students install this on their own computers. This
    way they can use the database environment beyond the course.\
    <https://github.com/mafudge/learn-databases>

-   **Applied Database Management.** Our active learning textbook,
    custom designed for this course. The chapters, content and examples
    align with the course and students can follow along in the
    learn-databases environment.
    <https://www.greatriverlearning.com/product-details/1947>\
    You will have access to an admin panel where you can view the
    student responses to questions within the chapter. You can also view
    the quiz scores, and setup re-takes as needed.

-   **Playposit**. This is a question-over-video hosting tool for
    flipped lessons. The video lectures for this course have been
    pre-recorded. As students watch the lecture, they must answer
    questions. There is a dashboard you can access to view responses to
    the questions.

# Assessment In This Course

Assessment measures what the student has learned. There are appropriate
times for assessments, and this is where we go wrong as instructors. We
often assess while the student is learning, and this creates high stress
situations for the student and only assesses students who can learn
independently. It does not support learning from our mistakes and
mastery over the materials.

This course is setup to use the mastery model but without the excessive
amount of grading that traditionally goes with it. Grading should be
easy and not time-consuming for you, and you should think of your
grading as assessing where each student is in their learning journey.

Here are the activities in this course, organized by assessment type:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Activity       Assessment        Notes
  -------------- ----------------- --------------------------------------
  Textbook       Not Graded        These are used to help the student
  Questions                        learn actively while reading the
                                   textbook. You can use the reports to
                                   identify common questions the students
                                   miss to prepare for lecture.

  Video Lecture  Not Graded        These are used to help the student
                                   learn actively while watching the
                                   lecture. You can use the reports to
                                   identify common questions the students
                                   miss to prepare for lecture.

  Textbook Quiz  Graded Assessment The quiz is an early-stage assessment
                                   to measure student understanding of
                                   key concepts from the unit. The
                                   incorrect quiz answers should be
                                   discussed / explained in class to help
                                   students gain clarity over the
                                   concepts.

  Homework       Effort Graded     The homework is a practice activity.
                 Assessment        It is graded not based on correctness
                                   (as that's too early in the learning
                                   process) but instead based on
                                   student's effort. An important part of
                                   effort grading is metacognition. The
                                   student should articulate what they
                                   learned, what is still unclear, and
                                   how they are struggling. This
                                   information will help you to prepare
                                   for class and in many ways in just as
                                   important as the work itself.

  Project        Graded Assessment The project, due at the end of the
                                   semester measures how the student can
                                   put together what was learned in the
                                   course as applied to a case study of
                                   their choosing. Their choosing is
                                   important as it will make them the
                                   subject matter expert (and not you).
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

# What Am I Doing in Class?

Because lectures are flipped (students watch them outside of class), you
might be wondering what exactly you are going to do in class? The
answer, is of course, reinforcing their learning! How do you do that?

## How to Prepare for Class Sessions

The key to being successful as an instructor in this course is to pay
attention to your students' struggles and address them through lecture.
Do not assume every student will be vocal about what they do or don't
know. Use the flipped lesson resources to help you.

The day before your class session:

1.  Collect notes of common issues, doubts and misunderstandings your
    students have about the course material for this week's topic. Do
    this by reviewing:

    a.  incorrect student answers on the quiz,

    b.  textbook activity submissions of your students,

    c.  engagement questions and comments from the video lectures

Try not to focus on the actual answers, but instead look for the "big
picture" do they not understand table joins? Window functions? Etc.

2.  Formulate a lesson, for class. I call this the prepared lesson. A
    prepared lesson can be in a variety of formats, depending on whether
    students are having trouble with the concepts or the application of
    them. For example:

    a.  Maybe your students aren't doing well with the relational
        concepts, You might issue an ungraded quiz and then go over the
        quiz in class. After the quiz, have another activity students
        perform on their own to make sure they've got it.

    b.  Students do not understand how and when to use ranking window
        functions, plan for an explanation brief activity around it. You
        might ask students to help you write the SQL to complete a query
        that can only be solved using a ranking window function, for
        example. After that example you might have the students work on
        another challenge in pairs or on their own.

    c.  In all cases, these activities should be engaging. Very hands
        on. Get your students in the habit of asking questions and
        engaging in the discussion.

3.  If you have time review the homework submissions and check for
    incorrect solutions to go over in class.

## The Class Format

How you fill time under this format? You'd be surprised how quickly it
goes. Assuming you've prepared for class, here's the format:

1.  Start with a shared google doc where your students can ask open
    questions about course material. Post the doc so students can see
    each other's questions. Make it anonymous so nobody knows who is
    asking the questions.

2.  Organize them into categories.

    a.  Meta-questions (e.g. when is the homework due?)

    b.  Questions about the current unit

    c.  Questions about the homework / previous unit, or prior units.

3.  Add your own questions based on what you learned preparing for
    class.

4.  Start class!

    a.  Address Meta questions

    b.  Wrap up last week

        i.  Address questions about previous unit / prior units.
        ii. Go over the homework (see below for ideas)

    c.  Engage this week

        i.  Address questions in the current unit, using activities (see
            below for ideas)
        ii. Wrap-up class reminding students what to do next week!

### Go over the Homework

There are many ways you can make going over the homework more engaging
for your students.

1.  Ask students to share their solution to the questions, then explain
    their solution. Use the shared google doc.

2.  Anonymously post incorrect solutions and have the class break down
    where the student went wrong.

3.  Encourage students to think about other ways to solve the problem.
    Ask students to offer up different solutions / interpretations.

### Answering Questions with the current unit

Try not to just lecture here. Make it participatory. You can:

1.  Ask the students to help you code the solution.

2.  Provide students time to code the solution and have someone post it
    anonymously.

3.  Ask students to provide a similar question to the one posed.
